**Mental illnesses are health conditions that disrupt a person's thoughts, emotions, relationships, and daily functioning.**
*Mental illness does can affect anyone, regardless of gender, age, income, social status, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or background.*
*Symptoms of mental health disorders vary depending on the type and severity of the condition.*
*When healing from mental illness, early identification and treatment are of vital importance.*
*We encourage those with symptoms to talk to their friends and family members and seek the counsel of a mental health professional.*
*Feeling comfortable with the professional you or your child is working with is critical to the success of the treatment.*
*Different treatment options are available for individuals with mental illness.*
*It is important to be as involved and engaged in the treatment process as possible.*
*There are many types of mental health professionals. The variety of providers and their services may be confusing. Each have various levels of education, training, and may have different areas of expertise. Finding the professional who best fits your needs may require some research.*
*Feeling comfortable with the professional you or your child is working with is critical to the success of your treatment. Finding the professional who best fits your needs may require some research.*
*It is important to continue involvement in the treatment process as much as possible.*
*family member, friend, clergy, healthcare provider, or other professionals*
*The best source of information regarding medications is the physician prescribing them*
*Create a plan for switching to a different treatment that will be a better fit.*
*Visit Healthfinder.gov to learn more.*
*Several different types of treatment and therapy that can help.*
*Mental health conditions are often treated with medication, therapy or a combination of the two.*
*There are many types of mental health professionals. Finding the right one for you may require some research.*
*Many people find peer support a helpful tool that can aid in their recovery.*

Mental illnesses are health conditions that disrupt a person's thoughts, emotions, relationships, and daily functioning. *
Mental illness can affect anyone, regardless of gender, age, income, social status, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or background. *
Symptoms of mental health disorders vary depending on the type and severity of the condition. *
When healing from mental illness, early identification and treatment are of vital importance. *
We encourage those with symptoms to talk to their friends and family members and seek the counsel of a mental health professional. *
Feeling comfortable with the professional you or your child is working with is critical to the success of the treatment. *
Different treatment options are available for individuals with mental illness. *
It is important to be as involved and engaged in the treatment process as possible. *
There are many types of mental health professionals. The variety of providers and their services may be confusing. Each has various levels of education, training, and may have different areas of expertise. Finding the professional who best fits your needs may require some research. *
Feeling comfortable with the professional you or your child is working with is critical to the success of your treatment. Finding the professional who best fits your needs may require some research. *
It is important to continue involvement in the treatment process as much as possible. *
Family member, friend, clergy, healthcare provider, or other professionals. *
The best source of information regarding medications is the physician prescribing them. *
Create a plan for switching to a different treatment that will be a better fit. *
Visit Healthfinder.gov to learn more. *
Several different types of treatment and therapy can help. *
Mental health conditions are often treated with medication, therapy, or a combination of the two. *
There are many types of mental health professionals. Finding the right one for you may require some research. *
Many people find peer support a helpful tool that can aid in their recovery. *
Inpatient care can help people stabilize on new medications, adjust to new symptoms, or get the help they need. *
There are likely plenty of resources that can be used to help you find mental health treatment in your community. These resources can help you find the right therapist and enable you to better understand viable treatment options and the treatment process. *
Sometimes, consumers of mental health services may consider participating in a research study when they have not experienced improvement despite having tried a variety of medications and treatments. Research studies (also known as clinical trials) may involve the use of new medications or new treatment approaches whose safety and effectiveness are being tested. While we support innovation in the field, consumers should be cautioned that there are risks associated with clinical trials – make sure you’re aware of them before you enroll. *
Similar to a medical advance directive or a health care power of attorney, a psychiatric advance directive is a legal document completed in a time of wellness that provides instructions regarding treatment or services one wishes to have or not have during a mental health crisis and may help influence his or her care. *
We all have mental health which is made up of our beliefs, thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. *
It can be difficult to find the things that will help you, as different things help different people. It's important to be open to a range of approaches and to be committed to finding the right help and to continue to be hopeful, even when some things don't work out. *
We can all suffer from mental health challenges, but developing our wellbeing, resilience, and seeking help early can help prevent challenges from becoming serious. *
It is often more realistic and helpful to find out what helps with the issues you face. Talking, counseling, medication, friendships, exercise, good sleep and nutrition, and meaningful occupation can all help. *
Challenges or problems with your mental health can arise from psychological, biological, and social issues, as well as life events. *
The most important thing is to talk to someone you trust. This might be a friend, colleague, family member, or GP. In addition to talking to someone, it may be useful to find out more information about what you are experiencing. These things may help to get some perspective on what you are experiencing, and be the start of getting help. *
If your beliefs, thoughts, feelings, or behaviors have a significant impact on your ability to function in what might be considered a normal or ordinary way, it would be important to seek help. *
This may depend on your relationship with them. Gently encouraging someone to seek appropriate support would be helpful to start with. *
Some people may advise you on good evidence of what works with the best of intentions, but it's important to find out what works best for you. *
"It may be tempting to try to block out the world altogether to avoid bad news, but it's important to keep yourself informed. We all have to step up during a pandemic because we all have a part to play in reducing the spread of the virus. It's important that you know what must be done and how you should do it. This is important for the health of your neighbors and your own mental health, and taking action can help counter difficult feelings like hopelessness and despair. *
One study from people in China found that people who had reliable up-to-date information about the coronavirus and COVID-19 illness and accurate instructions on how they should act (such as instructions around hand-washing and wearing a mask) felt more resilient and felt better able to handle the virus. People who received good, accurate information reported lower levels of stress, anxiety, and depression. This research is available for free at www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/17/5/1729. *
Of course, it's okay to set limits. Staying informed does not mean that you have to follow the news all day. Check in a few times a day, sticking to trusted sources and media outlets. While social media can be a great way to keep in touch with family and friends, social media can also amplify bad advice, vague or untrue stories, and other unhelpful information. Be sure to use good critical thinking skills." *
"Anyone can post anything online. It's up to the readers to think critically about information to decide if it seems helpful, truthful, or safe. Here are key points to keep in mind as you determine which information is worth considering and which information doesn't pass the test. *
It's so easy to spread information online, and we can't assume that the source we're reading or watching is the original source. Before you can evaluate anything, you need to know where the claims come from and determine if it's a reliable source. *
Reliable sources on the coronavirus and COVID-19 illness include the World Health Organization (WHO), Government of Canada ministries and agencies like Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada, the Government of BC ministries and agencies like the BC Ministry of Health, and the BC Centre for Disease Control (BCCDC). Scientists and researchers at universities and other institutions and health sciences professionals are also important sources of information. *
Headlines and titles need to be simple and short, so they can sometimes be misleading on their own. They may also be purposefully shocking or controversial to entice you to click to read more. *
Websites that belong to governments, government-funded agencies, well-known health providers, universities, or groups of medical professionals are generally the most reliable. Be careful of sites that don't list the author or don't tell you much about themselves. Double-check the author and the credentials of any 'experts' quoted or cited to see if they are actually experts in the topic being discussed. *
Can you find other evidence from other sources to support the claims? Does the author list their sources? Are the sources legitimate, like research journals? *
Unhelpful sources want you to feel a certain way: scared, angry, distrustful, vulnerable. Phrases like ""Skyrocketing rates of infection"" are sensational and they're meant to make people feel afraid. On the other hand, factual statements like ""We have 50 new cases in BC"" give you important information without playing into your emotions. Helpful news or information sources want you to feel informed and empowered. *
Who is paying for the site? What products or services are being advertised? What links or other sites do they promote? Are you learning something from a story or experience, or are you simply being directed to buy a product or service? *
Social media can be a great way to keep in touch with family and friends, especially as we practice physical distancing or self-isolation. Social media can also be an important way to learn from health experts and connect to support services and mutual aid groups in your community. *
Like any other source of information, it's important to use good critical thinking skills when you use social media. Studies find that searching for health information on social media generally has very mixed results. You'll see both very poor-quality sources next to good-quality sources, and it's up to you to decide which is which. In addition, social media posts tend to be short and rarely capture everything you need to consider. They are generally useful as a way to start learning or exploring different points of view rather than a place to gather all the information. *
Visit www.mediasmarts.ca to learn more about digital and media literacy *
Visit www.healthnewsreview.org to learn more about thinking critically around health claims (this resource is no longer updated daily, but all toolkits and lessons are still available) *
This page is adapted from the Evaluating Mental Health and Substance Use Information info sheet." *
"There are a lot of things you can't control. You can't control what happens next, how governments respond, or how your neighbors react to the pandemic. What you can do is make a plan and decide how you'll manage the things you do control, like your ability to stay safe, follow public health measures, stay connected with loved ones, and take care of your mental and physical health. *
Events like a pandemic change a lot over time, and that uncertainty can add to fear and stress. The truth is that we don't know what will happen next—but that doesn't mean we're all helpless. You can do a lot. You can: *
Map out a daily schedule, including times you can connect with loved ones online or by phone *
Plan out daily tasks and goals *
Give yourself a schedule to look up current information *
Make sure you have 14 days of healthy food and household supplies at home *
Keep medications on hand and talk to your doctor for advice if you're at increased risk *
Educate yourself on public health measures and figure out how you'll follow those instructions *
Figure out how you'll manage increased childcare demands, working for home, or other changes to your usual routine *
Determine if you'll need financial supports like the Canada Emergency Response Benefit or BC Temporary Rent Supplement if your job is affected by COVID-19. If you anticipate a need, you can find application instructions and gather any documents or other pieces of information ahead of time *
Figure out how you'll manage times when you feel overwhelmed or hopeless, like calming activities, the number for a local support or crisis line, a video chat with a loved one, or a way to connect with your mental health care provider *
Look for local support organizations, neighborhood groups, or mutual aid groups if you need extra help or support or would like to help others in your community *
Some planning will be straightforward, but you may also encounter situations or times when it's harder to see a solution or good plan of action. This is a great time to practice problem-solving skills. Problem-solving is a method that helps you break down a complicated situation into manageable pieces, look for realistic and unbiased information, brainstorm possible solutions, and test the solutions that you think might work well. Problem-solving is a helpful skill no matter what else is going on in the world, and it's an empowering, methodical approach when you might otherwise feel overwhelmed or lost. *
Check out the following resources for more information about problem-solving: *
Wellness Module 4: Problem-Solving: www.heretohelp.bc.ca/wellness-module/wellness-module-4-problem-solving *
Problem-solving worksheet from Anxiety Canada: www.anxietycanada.com/sites/default/files/ProblemSolving.pdf *
Effective Problem-Solving in The Antidepressant Skills Workbook: psychhealthandsafety.org/asw" *
"A lot of people are alone right now, but we don't have to be lonely. We're all in this together. *
While you may be physically separated from friends, family members, and other loved ones, it has never been more important to maintain those social connections. Social connections are an opportunity to seek and share support, talk through difficult feelings, share a laugh, keep up-to-date with loved ones, and help each other cope. This pandemic is a lot for one person to deal with on their own. While measures like physical distancing and self-isolation are necessary to slow the spread of the virus, the physical separation can amplify a lot of challenging emotions like loneliness and fear. *
Think about the different ways to connect that are most meaningful for you. For example, you might prefer a video chat over a phone call, or you might prefer to text throughout the day rather than one set time for a video call. Then, work with your social networks to make a plan. You might video chat with your close friends in the evening and phone a family member once a week. *
Remember to be mindful of people who may not be online. Check in by phone and ask how you can help. *
The quality of your social connections matter. Mindlessly scrolling through social media and liking a few posts usually doesn't build strong social connections. Make sure you focus on strategies that actually make you feel included and connected. If your current strategies don't help you feel connected, problem-solve to see if you can find a solution. *
Everyone feels lonely at times—maybe you recently moved to a new city, are changing your circle of friends, lost someone important in your life, or lost your job and also lost important social connections with coworkers. Other people may have physical connections to others but may feel like their emotional or social needs aren't met. Measures like social distancing or self-isolation can make loneliness feel worse no matter why you feel lonely now. *
Reach out to the connections you do have. Suggest ways to keep in touch and see if you can set a regular time to connect. People may hesitate to reach out for a lot of different reasons, so don't be afraid to be the one who asks. *
Look for local community support groups and mutual aid groups on social media. This pandemic is bringing everyone together, so look for opportunities to make new connections. These groups are a great way to share your skills and abilities or seek help and support. *
Look for specialized support groups. Support groups are moving online, and there are a lot of different support lines to call if you need to talk to someone. To find community services in BC, call or text 211 or visit www.bc211.ca. *
If you need extra support, you can talk with a psychologist or counsellor for free: *
You can access a free phone call with a Registered Psychologist though the Covid-19 Psychological Support Service from the BC Psychological Association. Visit www.psychologists.bc.ca/covid-19-resources. *
You can access free, phone-based, short-term support with a counsellor from a new group called the BC COVID-19 Mental Health Network. Email bccovidtherapists@gmail.com to receive an appointment time. *
For youth people ages 12-24, you can talk with a counsellor for free through Foundry Virtual. Visit foundrybc.ca/get-support/virtual/. *
Call the BC Mental Health Support Line at 310-6789. It’s available 24/7. *
Chat online with a Crisis Center volunteer at www.crisiscentrechat.ca (daily between noon and 1:00am) *
For older adults: Call the Seniors Distress Line at 604-872-123 *
For youth and young adults: Chat online with a volunteer at www.YouthinBC.com (daily between noon and 1:00am) *
For children and youth: Call the Kids Help Phone at 1-800-668-6868 or visit kidshelpphone.ca *
For tips on managing loneliness, check out the following resources: *
Coping with Loneliness from the Canadian Mental Health Association: cmha.bc.ca/documents/coping-with-loneliness/ *
Loneliness and Social Connection issue of Visions Journal at www.heretohelp.bc.ca/visions/loneliness-and-social-connection-vol14 *
Wellness Module 3: Social Support at www.heretohelp.bc.ca/wellness-module/wellness-module-3-social-support" *
"Taking care of your physical health is also good for your mental health. It's more important than ever to keep yourself healthy. *
Try to eat as well as you can. It may be easier to reach for unhealthier comfort foods and snacks while you spend more time at home, but try to keep a balanced approach. When you stock up on groceries, don’t ignore fresh fruit and vegetables—we still have everything we need to prepare food. Now that we're advised to limit the amount of time we spend in public spaces like grocery stores, this is a great time to try out new fruits and vegetables that keep at home for longer periods of time. *
If it's safer for you to stay home or you are in self-isolation, reach out for help. Many grocery stores and meal prep services offer safe, no-contact delivery. You can also ask family or friends to bring you groceries, or look for local COVID-19 support groups on social media. It's safest if others leave food and other supplies outside of your door to avoid spreading the virus. *
Exercise is an important part of mental health and well-being, stress management, and health sleep. However, it's something that many people give up when they start to feel stressed or overwhelmed. *
If it's safe for you to do so, spend time outside. You should still avoid busy areas or groups and stay at least two meters away from others, but there is no reason to avoid walks, runs, or other safe outdoor activities. (Note that some municipalities, BC Parks, and Parks Canada have restricted some outdoor spaces to reduce crowds, so check the status of your local parks or trails and respect closures—they're just keeping everyone safe.) *
If you prefer to exercise indoors, you can also find many different exercises classes online. You can try yoga, follow a barre class, work on your cardio, pick up a new dumbbell routine, and keep up with Crossfit WODs from the comfort of your living room. Look for no-equipment exercise routines or classes if you don't already have equipment. *
Poor sleep can make even simple problems feel a lot worse than they really are. Poor sleep can affect your mood, your outlook, and your patience. Unfortunately, stress and anxiety can really take a toll on your sleep. If you're having a hard time sleeping, be proactive and practice healthy sleep habits.  For more, check out Wellness Module 6: Getting a Good Night's Sleep at www.heretohelp.bc.ca/wellness-module/wellness-module-6-getting-a-good-nights-sleep. *
If you have other health problems like a chronic illness, check in with your doctor or health care team to see if you need to take any additional measures or precautions. Remember to plan ahead and do what you can to keep prescription or over-the-counter medications, medical supplies, supplements, or other health needs on hand." *
"Distraction is a very valid tool to help you cope when everything feels overwhelming or when you feel lonely or isolated. *
If you don't have a lot of energy or focus right now, try low-effort distractions like watching TV, browsing Youtube, listening to a podcast or audiobook, playing a game on your phone, reading an easy book or magazine, or working on a simple art project. *









